---
title: "Odin compilation speed tips"
date: 2026-01-19
description: "How to debug slow compile times and what to do about them"
---

Compilation speed is *really important*. If you hit build and it takes so long it pulls you out of the flow and you start scrolling twitter, that's a problem.

So what can we do to compile Odin programs faster? Here I'll try to explain some ways of debugging Odin compile times and ways to improve them.

## TL;DR

- Use faster linkers
- There is a `-show-debug-messages` flag to dump things like `LOC/s` and total parsed lines/tokens/packages, plus a lot of debug info.
- `-o:minimal` and `-microarch:native` is essentially free



# Small programs

Compilation speed of **large** projects is probably the most important thing when measuring compiler performance.

However in Odin, I often write many small utility "scripts" instead of using shell/batch/python.
It's very convenient, I get access to the core libraries running is simple as `odin run my_tool`.

So let's consider the following program. It's just a simple hello world, but all small tools need to print to console so it's at least a little representative of the real world.

```odin
import "core:fmt"

main :: proc() {
    fmt.printfln("Hello %s %i!", "World", 123)
}
```

To get the compilation speed, we can run `odin build` with the  `-show-timings`. On my machine, result is something like this:
```
Total Time                         -   270.198 ms - 100.00%
initialization                     -     7.618 ms -   2.81%
parse files                        -    12.968 ms -   4.79%
type check                         -    66.492 ms -  24.60%
LLVM API Code Gen (   54 modules ) -    82.512 ms -  30.53%
msvc-link                          -   100.602 ms -  37.23%
```

This is not *too* bad! But interestingly, compiling some of my projects (with tens of thousands lines of code, and a lot more in dependencies) don't compile that much slower.

So can we do better?

# Linker

In the example above, almost 40% of the time is spent in the linker. So let's try a different one.

Using `-linker:radlink` gets it down to about 15% on my machine. If you're on linux you can also try `mold`.

> In general, a faster linker can also improve compile times when the binary gets large (e.g. large dependencies, or big `#load` files).

# More Timings

There is a `-show-more-timings` which lists timings for all the internal compilation stages.

In most cases it doesn't tell you that much (it's mostly valuable for compiler developers), and most time is spent in `LLVM Object Generation` stage.

However, you still might want to look at the results if you need to debug *why* something is compiling slower than expected - sometimes you hit a slow path.

> For example, I ran into a case parsing a file with gigantic embedded arrays of integer constants generated by sokol shader compiler was adding ~3 seconds to my compile time.
>
> Always profile, especially when things go wrong.

# Internal Debug Messages

There is a hidden flag called `-show-debug-messages`, and while it's not intended for regular users, it's extremely useful. It dumps a LOT of good statistics to *stderr* useful for debugging and profiling.

So let's measure Hello World again:
```
odin build hello -show-timings -linker:radlink -show-more-timings -show-debug-messages
```

When you scroll a bit past the `LOC/s` sections (which are also extremely useful!), you'll see something like this:
```
Peak Memory Size: 271.000 MiB

Total Lines     - 80727
Total Tokens    - 395951
Total Files     - 162
Total Packages  - 26
Total File Size - 2572637
```

This is an overview of ***all*** the things the compiler had to parse to compile your program.

But 26 packages and 80k lines of code seems like a lot for a Hello World. All of that was pulled in by `core:fmt` and it's dependencies. Let's see if we can do something about it.

## `base:runtime` only

We can do something like the following to write data directly to *stderr*. The `base:runtime` is always included by default as it contains builtin implementations and other required features, so there's not much better we could do.

```odin
import "base:runtime"

main :: proc() {
    runtime.print_string("Hello World 123!")
}
```

The results look a lot nicer:
```
Peak Memory Size: 76.703 MiB

Total Lines     - 9211
Total Tokens    - 59321
Total Files     - 31
Total Packages  - 3
Total File Size - 290122
```
```
Total Time                         -    58.230 ms - 100.00%
initialization                     -     7.189 ms -  12.34%
parse files                        -     2.853 ms -   4.90%
type check                         -     5.993 ms -  10.29%
LLVM API Code Gen (   31 modules ) -    14.681 ms -  25.21%
rad-link                           -    27.510 ms -  47.24%
```

Only 9k LOC, 3 packages, and 60 milliseconds to compile the entire program! That's *really* nice.

But there's a problem: we lost all the nice `core:fmt`'s formatting functionality. This is a big issue, because it's very cumbersome to do all the formatting by hand.

## μ-fmt experiment

This lead me to write an experimental `ufmt` (micro-fmt) package. It does only the bare minimum, but it covers 90% of my own `core:fmt` use-cases.

```odin
import "ufmt"

main :: proc() {
    ufmt.printfln("Hello %s %i!", "World", 123)
}
```

The entire implementation is <200 lines of code and depends only on `base:runtime`.
It also compiles in 60 milliseconds and includes only 9k LOC.

There is only `tprintf`, `printf` and `printfln`. Only supported format qualifiers are the following:
- `%s`: string and cstring, no cstring16
- `%i`: all integer types
- `%x`: all integer types in hexadecimal, always zero padded
- `%f`: 16, 32 and 64 bit floats, with basic NaN/Inf detection
- `%%`: to print literal `%` characters

Here's the [initial ufmt version](https://gist.github.com/jakubtomsu/54ffb22fa7b8341cb9f573598c873d62) as a github gist.

> Of course, using this has no effect if you import a package which depends on `core:fmt`. This is pretty annoying, currently there is no good way
> to see what exactly is your program importing and why, apart of looking at temp obj files.
>
> On my branch of the compiler I experimented with printing a graphviz graph of all the packages with their includes, but that's not official.

# LLVM

In general the slowest part of the compilaton pipeline is the LLVM backend. Even with all optimizations disabled it takes quite a while.

Odin already codegen's each package independently to utilize all the CPU threads (LLVM cannot be multithreaded with better granularity).
And as a general rule, LLVM scales very poorly with the codegen amount. For example `-disable-assert` and `-no-bounds-check` can help by a very tiny bit because it's slightly less things to generate (so I don't think it's worth it for debug builds).

On the other hand, `-debug` **has a HUGE impact**. Generating the PDB is no small feat, and it can make compile times take **20-80% longer** in my experience.

# Optimization

Obviously, it's not a good idea to compile with `-o:speed/size/aggressive` if you want good compilation speed. But I still want debug builds that run fast!

But from my tests `-o:minimal` adds almost no overhead whatsoever, certainly less than ~5%.

Similarly, using `-microarch:native` adds no overhead. I'm pretty sure it just triggers a slightly different code path in the LLVM lowering passes, but could possibly yield some runtime perf benefits.


# Conclusion

GingerBill says the Odin compiler can still be a lot faster. And while there's plenty of room for optimization, it's not too bad in the current state.

I recomment the following command as a reasonable default for compiling lightweight tools:
```
odin build my_tool -linker:radlink -o:minimal -microarch:native
```

Thank you for reading!